---
layout: post
title: 'Lessons Learned: The First Two Years of Running a Software Consultancy'
comments: true
author: 'Brian Cardarella'
twitter: 'bcardarella'
github: bcardarella
social: true
summary: 'Brian talks about what has worked, what has not worked, and the changes that have been made at DockYard during its first two years'
published: true
tags: opinion, business, consulting
---

This is an update of [the previous post that reflected on the first six
months of DockYard](/opinion/2012/06/21/lessons-learned-six-month-of-running-dockyard.html).
A lot has changed over the past year and a half, and a lot has not. I
won't do a point-by-point comparison to the previous post but I will
address some as well as some of the feedback I got at the time. But
first, let's talk about revenue.

## Revenue

After our first year we took in about $750,000 in revenue. DockYard
officially began in January of 2012  so we had a full calendar year to
earn. From what I've been told this is pretty good for the first year as
a consultancy. In our second year we broke $1,500,000 at the beginning
of December. I'm happy with that, we doubled revenue. I have set a
revenue goal of $2,500,000 for 2013. Assuming there is no major screwups
next year we should exceed that goal.


### The Negative Stuff

Let's get the negative stuff out of the way first the focus on positives
for the remainder of the post. We could have done better the previous year, we could have done better
this year. We lost money due to decisions that I made throghout the
past two years. Those choices include two bad clients, a mistake in the
direction of our growth, and a lack of experience of running a
conference.

### Bad Clients

In the previous post I mentioned how DockYard nearly folded from the
start due to a bad client. That nightmare lasted of a year and half and
was finally settled in June of this year. It ended up being nearly a
$50,000 loss for us. I am convinced this is due entirely to poor legal
counsel, I cannot stress enough how important it is to have a competent
lawyer on your side. We didn't have someone that was willing to fight
for us, it cost us big time. We have since retained the law firm of
[Gesmer Updegrove](http://gesmer.com). They're pricey but it worth it.

However, before we ever engaged with our current laywer we unfortunately
had another run with a bad client. This time to the tune of $20,000.
That hit came this year. What is really strange is that I knew walking
into this deal it was going to end badly, and I voiced my concerns
internally to my people at the time but I still OK'd the deal and it
unfolded just as I thought it would. It was a dumb move and we paid the
price of it. 

One of the plans for DockYard was to quickly grow into the political
tech space in Washington, DC. I have experience working in political
tech, I brought on a guy who I worked with at the DNC, we hired another
guy I worked with on a political campaign. We started making
connections. It didn't work out. Three reasons:

#### Timing

Timing is everything I guess. Especially in political tech, we set out
on this effort right when the 2012 cycle ended. It was a ghost town, and
rightly so. There is no reason for campaigns or political groups to
spend money on development efforts when the next election cycle is two
years away. While we spoke with a lot of people that were interested in
what we could do from a technical perspective there simply were very
little groups with any budget at the time.

#### The People

My time at the DNC I worked with some awesome people. Nathan Woodhull,
Chris Gill, Brent Kimmel, Leo Zhadanovsky, and Nicole Aro to name a few.
I've been lucky enough to work with a few of them since. Unfotunately I
also got to work with some really shitty people too. I don't think its
their fault, the political tech space is a real drag. It doesn't 
attract a lot of talented people because the money to work on the inside
is very bad compared with any other job out there. The tone you get is
that it is a privillage that you should be thankful for, and perhaps
that is the case. But that leaves a vaccuum that gets filled with people
that frankly don't know the ass from a hole in the ground. Many of these
people are now in charge of making technology decisions in many
organizations. I have no interest in working with those types of people
again, nor do I want to subject my employees to work with them.

#### Politics

I've always considered myself "on the Blue team" but the past year has
really pissed me off. NSA, Healcare.gov, drone strikes, and the
President trying everything he can muster to go to war with Syria. I
walked into our Biz Developer's office one day and I said enough was
enough. I could not in good consceince do work for the Democratic Party
because of these issues.

### Just Dumb Wasted Money

[We ran a conference this year](http://wickedgoodruby.com) and due to my
lack of experience running an event like this (and to be honest, being
taken advantage of by the venue we held the conf at) we lost $15,000.

There were also downtimes when we didn't have enough money coming in,
but I will get into detail about this later in this post. (and the
changes we've made to hopefully avoid this in the future)

Overall I am pretty proud with our revenue over the past two years.
We didn't start with an "industry superstar" on our team or with a
significant OSS project in our pocket, nor were we on the "inside" of
the Boston tech scene. We've built a very strong brand for ourselves
very quickly.

### Open Source

This is still a financial loser for us. I don't care what people say, that's a
fact. However, [Pete Forde](https://twitter.com/peteforde) commented on
my last post and what he said was absolutely true: it will help you hire
good people. DockYard has been making a name for itself in the Ruby and
Ember open source world. We have a good number of projects that people
are actively using. I encourage all of our developers to contribute back
to not just our projects but projects we use on a regular basis.

### Personel

I've made missteps on hirings, that is also costly. I'll get into this
later in the article.

Ok, enough with the negative stuff. Let's get into what we did right.

## Great Clients

We have had some awesome clients over the past year and a half. I am
pretty much happy with everyone we've had with the exception of the two
clients I alluded to above. We have kept a balance of Startups and
Enterprise, but we have been very careful about the people we work with.
This is how I have boiled it down to the clients we want to work with:

1. Can they afford us? If you think it is callous to put this as the
   first thing we look for then you are probably not someone we want to
work with. We are running a business and there are plenty of great ideas
out there and plenty of great people. But the sad fact is many of them
cannot afford to build the applicaitons they dream of, at least not
through us. Financially vetting clients is very important. It makes no
sense to waste our time in contract negotiations with someone that
cannot afford our services. We try to discover this as soon as possible
so we don't waste any of the client's time either. We try to make the
best recommendation on the next steps they can take. We never take
equity.

2. Is this an application we want to work on? I would make this the 2nd
   No. 1 if I could. While it is very important to make sure we have
clients that can pay us so we can pay our employees it is equally
important to make sure we have projects that our employees actually want
to work on. This is something that I butt heads with our Biz Developer
early on. He was not coming form a developer background and at the start
did not know what projects good and which were shit, from an engineering
perspective. Consultancies are feeding ground for other companies to
poach from. We try an retain our employees by paying well and by keeping
them on interesting and challenging projects.

3. Does this client help us get to a bigger client? This is something we
   have, over the past six months, started to think about when speaking
with clients. Is this a project we would be proud to put in our
portfolio? Is this a project we can write a case-study on? Is this a
project that helps us make a sales pitch to an even larger client?

If we can stick to these three items when choosing clients I think we'll
be fine. That is not always the case and from time to time we have had
to sacrifice up the chain. So The first to go is #3, then #2, and
finally #1 if we are desperate.

## Our Tech Stack

While we started out as a Rails shop we have moved very quickly over the
past year to brand ourselves also as an [Ember](http://emberjs.com) shop.

I believe in Ember as a technology, it is superior to any other
JavaScript framework out there in every way except for the learning
curve. I see many developers that I have known in the Boston area hate
on Ember. Good, let them. More for us. We also chose Ember for business
reasons.

Competing with all of the other Rails shops in Boston is just stupid.
Down the street we have one of the most well know Rails consultancies in
the world (thoughtbot) and within a half a mile we have about 6 others
lesser-known ones. From an ability perspective we are just as good as
any of them, but then again that's the point of Rails. There is no
technological advantage that any one shop has over another nowadays. We
all pretty much do the same "best practices" and use nearly the same tech
stack. There is nothing that distinguishes one shop from another. So we
have diversified our offerings.

I chose Ember as a technology direction because it was, and still is,
incredibly undervalued in the market. If I was playing a short game in
our business I would invest in Angular, it is the tech-du-jour but a
year from now I seriously doubt that will be the case. While everyone
else is wasting their time specializing in Angular we're building an
incredibly strong presence in the Ember world. When the scale tips we're
going to be in a great position. At least that's the theory. Time will
tell, maybe the next time I write on of these I'll be bitching about how
wrong I was. We'll see.

## Hiring

For the most part I've been very lucky with the team I've hired.
Recently we just had our holiday party and I thought on my way to the
dinner that this is the team I've always wanted. I can't imagine that is
a very common thing for people to think. And that's not the saw we
haven't had missteps.

### Firing People

I've gotten permission to talk about this from Russ. Russ was a
co-founder of DockYard and I fired him. It was around the time of the
first post but I didn't want to reflect on it yet. In retrospect it was a
long-term mistake but perhaps the correct short-term decision. We were
not at the size when I was really thinking too long-term. I was not
getting from him what I needed and it was weighing me down mentally, but
this was my fault. I was not communicating to Russ proparly what my
expectations were. Thankfully we're still friends and grab drinks every
now and then. If the roles were reveresed I don't think I would be as
magnanimous.

I've since fired two others. One was my fault, the other was not. It is
a strange thing to fire someone. People try to make it nice by saying
"let them go", but in reality you've shit-canned them. When you are
employing someone, especailly at a small company, you feel a sense of
responsibility for them. You are paying them money and provide them with
health care they use to take care of their family. I wish we could
magically double the salaries of all of our employees but of course we
cannot afford that. When it came time to firing someone it weighed on me
and I considered the implications. I never did it lightly, but
considering the alterative they have turned out the be the correct move.
Even with Russ, he's done much better without DockYard than he was doing
with DockYard.

### Losing People

We have so far lost just one employee, one of our DC partners Chris
Gill. He got a job with the Deptartment of Revenue that paid well beyond
what we could afford. I was actually pretty proud of him that we landed
it. I have left enough jobs in my career to know that I never want to be angry
at someone that has decided to leave DockYard. If it is time to go, it
is time to go. Considering the number of Jr. devs we have been training
up I would like to think of it as an accomplishment of ours to see
people "graduate" from DockYard and go on to do great things in the
industry. (but don't leave us too quick!)

## Business Development

In the summer of 2012 I was overwhelmed. I was Lead Developer, Business
Developer, Office Manager, and Everything Else\* at DockYard. The most
important job I had was making sure new business was coming in. But
focusing on that was having a negative impact on the client projects I
was on as well as training any developers we had that required it. I
started a search for a Business Developer. At first I hatched a plan to
leverage the recruiters of Boston. It made sense: they already were
talking to companies but it was difficult for those companies to hire.
Why not just partner with DockYard and rent our services to those
companies? At 8% the math actually worked out in their favor, none of
them bit. I'm still struggling with this one and I think it speaks to
the state of recruitment. It was a good business opportunity but they
could not think outside the box.

So it was time to find someone for that position. I had never made a
non-technical hire before. I had no idea how to do that. I looked
specifically for "Business Developers" but that was a bust. I gave up
for a month or two then I realized that it was essentially a Sales
position. So I put an ad out for a someone in sales looking to take on a
larger role, a key role for the growth of a young company. I got about
50 resumes and brought in two people for interview. I liked them both
and settled on the one with the better references. It was a great
decision. Our Biz Developer Dan Crowther has been huge for us. We butt
heads on a few things, he's right sometimes and I'm right sometimes. But
the fact is we would not be where we are today without him.

It took him about six months to really get comfortable with the
position, this is very common from what I've been told of those
transitioning into this position. He's helped us open up business we
wouldn't have known about otherwise. And most important I can focus on
other things.

We sell DockYard on the quality of our work. While we started as a
technology company design has become a large part of who DockYard is and
has gone a long way to help sell our brand.

## Design

Since our first "real" contract with [Openbay](http://openbay.com) we
worked with an outside designer, Steven Trevethan. He was recommended to
me by two seperate people. Steve along with his partner Logan Faerberer
were starting their own consultancy Dobot. Steve and I got along prety
well and I brought them back for a few more contracts. We bonded over
our mutaul disdain for many of the people in the [C3 space at
CIC](http://www.cambridgecoworking.com/aboutc3.html) and so when we
finally got our own office last year I invited Steven and Logan to work
from there. We even brought them along to check out the office spaces
we were interested in. This past Spring it became obvioud that we needed
someone fulltime at DockYard to take ownership of our design. Likewise
Dobot was also looking for a lead engineer. It would be funny it is
wasn't so stupid that we were literally sharing the same office, workd
on several projects, and were still looking for one another. Steve and I
grabbed drinks and I laid it out: let's do this. He agreed and we brough
Steve on as our Creative Director and a partner. Logan came on as a lead illustrator. It
is the best move we've made to date. Steve and Logan quickly took
ownership of the design direction of DockYard and have along with Amanda
and Angelo put out a [website that really represents who we
are](http://dockyard.com) and have also put together some amazing
designs for our clients.

While earlier I mentioned how it was very difficult to differentiate
ourselves from other Rails shops, the one place we can totally do that
is with design. Ultimately design sells much better than engineering.
The engineering part of our contracts bring in more money, so we have
make certain that the design contracts we pick up will convert to
engineering contracts. We look at design as the best Lead Generator we
could get. It has worked, very well.

## Office Manager

This is one that I was told multiple times that I should do sooner than
later. I am very bad with context switching, I have to either do all
business stuff one day or all engineering. I cannot do both effectively.
After hiring Crowther I knew the next non-technical hire I wanted was an
office manager. What I did might be considered overboard.

I put an ad on Craigslist. We got over 200 responses. I brought the list
down to around 100 and sent out invites and asked peoiple to schedule
themselves for an interview through
[YouCanBook.me](https://gb.youcanbook.me/) I blocked out over two weeks
of time, and broke the interviews into 20 minute blocks. Over 60
interviews were scheduled. I ended up meeting with about 40 of people.
It was one of the crazier things I've done but this was a position I had
no idea how to hire and the only way I could figure to find the right
person was to see a ton of candidates and waited to see what stuck. The
person we hired was the 2nd person to walk through the door, Mariel
Ebrahimi. We got real lucky, and I think I even came out of that
interview and told everyone that we were probably going to hire her.
However, considering she was only the 2nd candiate I still went through
the next two weeks of interviews. It became obvious that she was well
beyond anybody else coming in and over the past few months she has kept
DockYard running smoothly. Being able to let go of these small things in
the office is incredibly freeing and has allowed me to focus on the
bigger picture.

I have been toying with the idea of hiring a Project Manager in Boston.
We did that before in Washington, DC but we were in a very different position that
we are now and I think the position only works for us, at our size, in
Boston. I am currently running PM on most projects, at least to a
certain degree. I allocate resources, and assign roles. Developers at
DockYard look to me for what they should be doing next. It's time
consuming and only gets worse as we grow. We'll see what happens in the
next few months.

## Getting Our First Office

I was pretty annoyed with all of the entrepreneurial bullshit that was
going on in the CIC in Cambridge. It is a terrible working environment,
especially if you are a consultancy. You get bugged all the time by the
worst people. The space is **incredibly** loud. If you go there to work
on the weekends its fantastic. But it became obvious very quickly that
we needed an office. We worked with [Jon
Frisch](https://twitter.com/jfrisch21) at [T3
Advisors](http://www.t3advisors.com/). We were growing and so we need
space to grow into. We decided upon a 2,200 square foot 2nd floor space
in Downtown Crossing. I always wanted an office there because of how
centrally located it was. Thankfully Downtown Crossing ends up being
much cheaper real-estate than many of the other places around Boston.
(although this is arleady changing)

We had some difficulty moving in. We were supposed to start the buildout
in July of 2012. I was getting married in late August. The owner kept
deflecting us, and deflecting. I went on my honeymoon and when I got
back I asked him what the deal was. He said, "Ok, it's no longer an
active crime scene so I can tell you what happened."

It turns out that our office is a floor above a jewelery store. The
floor in our office is concrete. Two guys broke down a side door to the
vacant space, brough some mini-jackhammers and drilled a man-size hole
into the store below. They then repelled down with ropes and started to
clean the place out. There were some silent alarms that were set off and
they got busted. Exactly why it took them 2 months to clear the place to
allow us to build I don't know. But considering how crazy the story is I
was OK with it.

Anyway, we finally got into the space in October of 2012. Thankfully no
more jewelery heists have happened. We host a lot of community events at
our office and I'm really happy with that. Currenty we organize [Boston
Ember](http://www.meetup.com/Boston-Ember-js/), [Boston Openhack](http://openhack.github.io/boston/), [UX Boston](http://www.meetup.com/uxboston/), run classes for [Girls Develop It Boston](http://www.girldevelopit.com/chapters/boston), and
host [Boston
Postgres](http://www.meetup.com/Boston-PostgreSQL-Users-Group-BPUG/).

## Starting Over

If I had to start DockYard from scratch today I would do it differently.
The number one thing I would do different is not agree to a partnership
until 6 months out. I would have awarded co-founder status to those
that started but I think when you first get going you don't really
understand what the roles will really be. Assigning roles on day zero
and expecting everyone to just stick to these roles is not realistic if
this is everyone's first rodeo. Trial by fire is the best way to define
the roles. Once that is done then the partnership can be established.
Perhaps someone that previously thought being partner was a good idea
was not actually interested in the added responsibility? Perhaps someone
you didn't think was "partner material" ends up being one of your key
people and that should be rewarded.

I would also hire a little more slowly than we did at first. I have not
yet been able to pay myself what I've set my salary to. The first year I
paid myself 25% of that salary. This year I've hit my goal of paying
myself 50%. Next year I hope to hit 100% of that goal. Thankfully I've
got a wife that makes a good living and we've been able to lean on that
when I've needed to take myself off of payroll. If our situation were
different I am not confident that DockYard would be around today, at
least not in its currently form. I've been able to take risks that
others might night be able to.
