---
layout: post
title: "Think"
comments: true
author: Dan McClain
twitter: "\_danmcclain"
github: danmcclain
social: true
summary: "Don't do what others tell you to do without thinking about it"
published: true
tags: ruby on rails, gems, postgres_ext, postgresql
---

Ever since [Matt Aimonetti's talk at
Wicke Good Ruby](http://wickedgoodruby.com/2013/speakers/matt_aimonetti)
about the fact that there is no such thing as bad code, I've felt I
needed to write a blog post about the [cargo culting]() that happens in
the development world. 

# Sandi Metz's Rules

Back in January, [Sandi Metz was on Ruby
Rogues](ihttp://rubyrogues.com/087-rr-book-clubpractical-object-oriented-design-in-ruby-with-sandi-metz/)
to discuss her [Object-Oriented Design]() in Ruby book. Out of this
coversation came "[Sandi Metz's
rules](https://gist.github.com/henrik/4509394)". Many
in the Ruby community took these rules as gospel, without knowing the
context that the rules were created.

Sandi joined Matt during his talk at Wicked Good Ruby and gave the
context in which she created these rules. To paraphase Sandi, she was
working with a group that had multi-thousand line controllers with
multi-hundred line methods. These contollers and methods represented on
end of a spectrum, which made code incredibly hard to read and maintain.
They were begging Sandi for guidelines with which they should try to
correct this problem, so what she did was create a set of rules that
lived on the opposite side of the spectrum, to force them to meet
somewhere in the reasonable center.

In reality, these rules are a different way of looking at rules many of
us strive for in the first place. An example: The 100 lines per class
rule is really forcing you to create classes with the [Single
Responsibility Principle]() in mind.

My issue is not with these rules as they exist, but with the
community's tedency to gravate to these rules and treat them as The Four
Commandments. I don't have an issue with you following them, as long as
you understand why they exist, and you feel as though they are
principles you believe in. Don't just make five line methods because
Sandi said so, and if you follow those rules, you feel like you'll be a
great developer. Adhering to rules does not make one great, it's
understanding where these, or any rules, should and shouldn't apply.
Sometimes a method that spans more than five lines will be more readable
and maintainable than the same method spread across five or six 5-line
methods. Striking that balance is where the power lies.

# REMOTE

37signals just published [REMOTE](), a book that telling companies that
the benefits allowing remote workers. I don't disagree with that remote
working has many benefits, at DockYard, we all work from home from time
to time. We also strive to have people in the office more often than
not, not because Brian doesn't think we aren't working when we aren't in
the office, but because it enables greater collaboration.

DockYard is a consultancy, we have client work with deadlines we have to
meet. With having our developers and designers in the office together more
often than not, it removes the latency from discussing issues. I can
walk over to Steve and we can hash out an issue in a few minutes. If we
were all remote, I'd have to ping him on HipChat, hope he's at his desk,
try to go over the issue text-only until we realize we need to have a
Google Hangout, etc. It makes more sense for us to be in the same place.

The other benefit of DockYard working from the office is that our junior
developers enjoy the same face-to-face benefits. Also, body language
makes a huge difference with discussing a topic. When someone pauses,
has a slightly puzzled look on their face and says "....Ok", it easy to
realize that a bit more background on the topic will really let them
graps the topic, but an "ok" in HipChat removes all the body language we
could leverage.

A product company that employs experts (or creators) of a framework has
a much different situation, were working remote makes a lot more sense.
The conversations they have will be at a different level. They'll all
have intimate knowledge of the code base, and so a few questions back
and forth or a quick Google Hangout achieve a great deal.

# Figure Out What Works for YOU

In no way am I saying you should all work in the same office and
disregard Sandi's rules. What I'm asking of the community is a bit of
critical thought. Just because someone smart said something doesn't
meant it's gospel. Realize that experience has led that person to that
conculsion, way your experience against it, and apply it if you can.
Let's just not hope that the Gods give us food because we made bamboo
airplanes. Let's realize that moving to XYZ come with both drawbacks and
benefits, not just the benefits that everyone is touting.
