---
layout: post
title: "The Beginner Fallacy"
comments: true
author: 'Brian Cardarella'
twitter: 'bcardarella'
social: true
published: true
tags: opinion
---

Helping onboard beginners is a hot topic right now in software
development. It is very good that this is important to people as we need
new software developers. However, I have noticed that many of these
developers are finding a difficult time advancing beyond beginner. This
is especially evident when they are taken out of their current
development environment.

Beginners require guidance and a set of rules to follow. This has been
shown time over time to be an effective strategy to onboarding. The
rules/principles/laws, whatever you want to call them, are based upon
the experience of more advanced developers that essentially boil down to 
"here is what you want to do *most* of the time". They are a great
substitute for experience. They also fit in very nicely with the notion
of **Convetion Over Configuration**.

I am a big fan of Convention Over Configuration. I was first exposed to
it with Ruby on Rails and I am a big fan that Ember.js has been
following this path as well. However, I also believe that it can become
a cruth for beginners. The rules that they are following coupled with
the low friction environment of COC leads to a developer experience that
does not present too many obstacles to be overcome. Learning requires
challenge. You meet a challenge, you learn how to overcome that
challege, you move on and now that experience is a tool you can wield in
the future.

The market being flooded with beginners along with COC frameworks should
produce an employment environment for product companies that is heavily
favored towards the employer. In most cases these developers will be
able to accomplish most of what a very experienced developer can
accomplish. This is great for the company's bottom line but not so good
for the individual developer's own career growth.

Instead, if you are interested in how do you advance beyond a beginner
you must get out of your comfort zone. This is going to require you to
put more time into your craft than you job necessarily allows. Try new
software languages, try old software languages. Go read
[SICP](https://mitpress.mit.edu/sicp/). Attend meetups, read papers,
contribute to open source. *Contribute to open source even if you think
your PR won't be accepted*. All of these things will take you out of the
comfort zone that your daily work gives you, but you'll grow and become
a better (and more in demand) developer for it.
